data/lab: Add memory security section (#166)
open-education-hub/operating-systems: content/chapters/data/lab/content/memory-security.md

# Memory Security

Memory security is one of the most important aspects in today's computer systems.

> The main objective of it is to prevent attackers from exploiting memory vulnerabilities that are present in a program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its main objective is to prevent attackers from exploiting memory vulnerabilities that are present in a program.
```

> The main objective of it is to prevent attackers from exploiting memory vulnerabilities that are present in a program.

Reviewer 2: I'd say there are 2 objectives:
- avoid vulnerabilities altogether
- prevent attackers from exploiting the existing ones

Memory protection techniques are implemented at all levels of memory abstraction: hardware, operating system and programming language.

> In addition, third party tools may be used to statically and dynamically examine a program to identify vulnerabilities when working with memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, third-party software tools may be used to statically and dynamically examine a program to identify vulnerabilities when working with memory.
```
This is worth mentioning after the last sentence.

> In this section we will focus on the main memory vulnerabilities that are known and exploited.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we will focus on the main memory vulnerabilities and how to exploit them.
```

> We will the C programming language for presentation purposes, however, these examples may be reproduced in any language that implements arrays as pointers without bounds and allows the liberal use of pointers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will use the C programming language for presentation purposes, however, these examples may be reproduced in any language that implements arrays as pointers without bounds and allows the liberal use of pointers.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will use the C programming language for presentation purposes.
However, these examples may be reproduced in any language that implements arrays as pointers without bounds and allows the liberal use of pointers.
```

## Wild Pointer Arithmetic Info Leak

In C, once a pointer has been initialized with a valid address it can potentially access any location of the process address space.
This is problematic for situations where the binary contains sensitive information.
Take for example a server that authenticates users: if the password is stored in some buffer, then if a pointer is wrongfully used, it can end up leaking the password.

Navigate to the `support/memory-security/` directory.
Open and analyze the `buff-leak.c` file.

### Quiz

[Quiz1](../quiz/memory-regions-vars.md)

### Practice

The pointer `p` points to the stack, however, we can modify any variable that is declared in the program through `p`.
All we need to know is the offset of the other memory locations that we wish to access.

> Run the program and try to input the correct offsets as to modify variables from different regions of our program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the program and try to input the correct offsets to modify variables from different regions of our program.
```

# Memory Security

Memory security is one of the most important aspects in today's computer systems.

> Its main objective is to avoid the development of vulnerable code and prevent attackers from exploiting existing memory vulnerabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Its main objectives are to avoid the development of vulnerable code and to prevent attackers from exploiting existing memory vulnerabilities.
```

Memory protection techniques are implemented at all levels of memory abstraction: hardware, operating system and programming language.
In addition, third-party software tools may be used to statically and dynamically examine a program to identify vulnerabilities when working with memory.

In this section, we will focus on the main memory vulnerabilities and how to exploit them.
We will use the C programming language for presentation purposes, however, these examples may be reproduced in any language that implements arrays as pointers without bounds and allows the liberal use of pointers.

## Wild Pointer Arithmetic Info Leak

In C, once a pointer has been initialized with a valid address it can potentially access any location of the process address space.
This is problematic for situations where the binary contains sensitive information.
Take for example a server that authenticates users: if the password is stored in some buffer, then if a pointer is wrongfully used, it can end up leaking the password.

Navigate to the `support/memory-security/` directory.

> Open and analyze the `buff-leak.c` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open and analyze the `buff_leak.c` file.
```

[Answer this quiz](../quiz/memory-regions-vars.md)

### Practice

The pointer `p` points to the stack, however, we can modify any variable that is declared in the program through `p`.
All we need to know is the offset of the other memory locations that we wish to access.
Run the program and try to input the correct offsets to modify variables from different regions of our program.
Once a correct offset is given as input, the program will output a validation message.

> Note that adding or subtracting user provided values to pointers enables an attacker to observe a programs entire memory!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that adding or subtracting user provided values to pointers enables an attacker to observe a program's entire memory!
```

## Buffer Overflow Info Leak

Since arrays decay to pointers in C, the same effect may be obtained by using them.

Navigate to the `support/memory-security/` directory.

> Open and analyze the `array-leak.c` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open and analyze the `array_leak.c` file.
```

Compile and run the program.
Can you extract any information from the output?
Can you identify the return address of the main function?

> **Note:** You can use `objdump -D -M intel array_leak` to check the stack layout.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** You can use `objdump -d -M intel array_leak` to check the stack layout.
```
Disassembling the entire executable isn't necessary and adds unnecessary output. Simply disassembling the code sections should suffice.

**Note:** Depending on the environment the layout may differ.

> Next, open and analyze the `string-leak.c` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, open and analyze the `string_leak.c` file.
```

Compile and run the program.
To better understand the output, use `xxd` to interpret the output as hexadecimal bytes:

> ```sh
> ./string_leak | xxd

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```console
student@os:~/.../lab/support/memory-security$ ./string_leak | xxd
```

```

**Note:** `73` and `6f` are the ascii values of `s` and `o`

[Answer this quiz](../quiz/string-buff-over.md)

### Practice

> In file `string-leak.c` replace the usage of `memcpy` with `strcpy`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In file `string_leak.c` replace the usage of `memcpy()` with `strcpy()`.
```

Do not modify anything else (including the size of the buffer).

> As the name suggests, `strcpy` is specialized for string copies, therefore we don need to specify how much we want to copy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the name suggests, `strcpy()` is specialized for string copies, therefore we don need to specify how much we want to copy.
```

> What is the result? Is the result correct? Explain the result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What is the result?
Is the result correct?
Explain the result.
```

[Answer this quiz](../quiz/string-strcpy.md)

## Buffer Overflow Overwrite

Up until this point we have seen how we can exploit a buffer to leak information.

> However, this vulnerabilities may be used most of the time to overwrite data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, this vulnerability may be used most of the time to overwrite data.
```

Take for example the code in `support/memory-security/bo_write.c`.

> Compiler and run the code. What happens? Why?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compile and run the code.
What happens?
Why?
```

[Answer this quiz](../quiz/stack-layout.md)

### Practice

> **Note:** For this task you first need to run `echo 0 | sudo tee /proc/sys/kernel/randomize_va_space`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** For this task you first need to run `echo 0 | sudo tee /proc/sys/kernel/randomize_va_space`.
```

> Open the `support/memory-security/bo_write_practice.c`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open the `support/memory-security/bo_write_practice.c` file.
```

Analyze the code, then compile it and run it.

1. Try to find an input that alters the control flow of the program so that "Comm-link online" is printed.
You are not allowed to modify the source file.
**Bonus:** After you have succeeded, can you think of a different input that leads to the same result?

> 2. Try to find an input that alters the control flow of the program so that "Channel open." is printed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Try to find an input that alters the control flow of the program so that "Channel open." is printed.
```
The rendered page is the same and this makes it simpler to add newer list items if need be.

As the name suggests, `strcpy()` is specialized for string copies, therefore we don need to specify how much we want to copy.
What is the result?
Is the result correct?
Explain the result.

[Answer this quiz](../quiz/string-strcpy.md)

## Buffer Overflow Overwrite

Up until this point we have seen how we can exploit a buffer to leak information.
However, this vulnerability may be used most of the time to overwrite data.

Take for example the code in `support/memory-security/bo_write.c`.
Compile and run the code.
What happens?
Why?

[Answer this quiz](../quiz/stack-layout.md)

### Practice

Open the `support/memory-security/bo_write_practice.c` file.
Analyze the code, then compile it and run it.

1. Try to find an input that alters the control flow of the program so that "Comm-link online" is printed.
You are not allowed to modify the source file.

1. Try to find an input that alters the control flow of the program so that "Channel open." is printed.
You are not allowed to modify the source file.

**Note:** Addresses are 8-byte long on 64 bit machines.

1. Can you think of a different input that results in printing "Comm-link online"?

> ## ASLR

Author: I pondered upon it, but I think those details are a bit overwhelming. I think it's enough for them to understand that the sections are simply mapped at different virtual addresses and that you need both compiler support and operating system support to achieve that. Let's see how this goes and we can add more meat next year if need be.

```

Disable PIC by uncommenting the `-fno-PIC` and `LDFLAGS` lines.

We observe that for randomization to work, we need to instruct the OS to randomize the program sections and the compiler to generate code that is position independent.

[Answer this quiz](../quiz/memory-aslr.md)

## Stack Protector

As observed in the previous quiz, ASLR prevents an attacker (most of the times) from discovering a reliable address where to jump to, however, it does not prevent the occurrence of a buffer overflow.
An effective strategy to protect against buffer overflow is represented by the stack protector (or stack canary).
Betweem the end of the buffer and the return address, a random value is placed on the stack.
Before the function returns, the value is checked: if the initial value was modified, then an exception is issued and the program is aborted.

Stack canaries are enabled by default, however, for learning purposes we have disabled it by passing `-fno-stack-protector` to the compiler.

### Practice

Comment the `-fno-stack-protector` switch from the `support/memory-security/Makefile`, recompile and run the `bo_practice_write` executable.

> Examine the binary with `objdump` and identify the instructions that set and test the canary.

Author: That's why you have a lab assistant. Also, I plan on adding solutions for all of these.

> Examine the binary with `objdump` and identify the instructions that set and test the canary.

Reviewer 2: We wish anyone to be able to pick up this material and learn about operating systems on their own. You should add that output to the solution folder when you create it.

Observe what happens when a buffer overflow occurs.

[Answer this quiz](../quiz/memory-stack-protector.md)

## Bypassing the Stack Protector

The stack protector is generally placed immediately after the old `rbp`.
With this information we can craft various exploits to bypass it:

- Leak the canary and do not modify.
Reading the canary, as long as we do not modify it is not going to cause any disturbances.

> If we have the canary, we can just include it in our payload and hapilly overwrite the return address.

Author: yeah, sorry for that.

- If we have access to a pointer that we can modify appropriately, we can just jump over the canary and directly modify the return address.

> - In case we have multiple buffers defined, we can simply overwrite data in a different buffer without the stack protector intervention.

Author: No, I meant:

```c
void main()
{
    int a[10];
    int b[10];
    int c[10];
}
```

You may cause a buffer overflow that rewrites say portions of `b` because there's only 1 stack canary and 3 buffers.

> - In case we have multiple buffers defined, we can simply overwrite data in a different buffer without the stack protector intervention.

Reviewer 2: Then specify that the buffers are defined in the same function.
